---
title: "GTA Online Guides"
permalink: /collections/gta-online-guides
lang: en
license: false
---

[GTA Online](https://www.rockstargames.com/GTAOnline/) is an online multiplayer
game in the famous Grand Theft Auto series made by Rockstar Games. Released in
2013 and constantly getting updates, GTA Online has been attracting more and
more players with its unique game modes and multiplayer experience.

Unlike other single player GTA titles such as GTA V, each of which mainly
focuses on a story line consisting of many missions, most game contents and
activities in GTA Online are centered around the in-game money, officially
referred to as GTA$.

Since GTA Online's release, Rockstar has made dozens of content updates for it.
Now, there is a great diversity of activities you can do in the game, either
alone or with friends and strangers, and a wide array of businesses in which
you obtain, manufacture, and sell different kinds of products. All of those
things allow you to earn GTA$, which can be spent on cars, planes, houses, etc.

However, some activities and businesses are more rewarding than others. Often,
you will not be told what things will pay you more and what do not by the
information the game will give you. In addition, not all purchasable items in
the game are worth the money you will pay for it. In real life, you usually
have the opportunity to return something you don't like for a refund; in GTA
Online's universe, all in-game purchases are final, so when you regret, it's
already too late.

It is important to know what the easiest and fastest ways to earn GTA$ are and
what purchases give you the most utility with the least cost, so you can
efficiently build a successful GTA Online career. As an experienced player who
has played GTA Online for 1650 hours, reached almost Rank 260 with one
character and 160 with another, and earned GTA$220M as of
{{ "2020-05-02" | date: "%B %e, %Y" }}, my job is to give you my suggestions in
this collection on what to do, in what steps should you do them, and what not
to do in order to get better progress in less time.

## Work in Progress

A lot of articles have been planned for this collection, and completing all of
them takes very long time, so I have decided to publish this collection in
several batches. Check back later to see if new articles have been published!

You might find that some hyperlinks in those published articles are leading you
to a "404 Not Found" page. These are links to planned but unpublished articles,
and I intentionally left them there because I don't want to forget a link
should be added to those places. If there is any inconvenience to you, please
accept my apology.

## Contents

{% include collection-doc-list.html collection=site.gta-online-guides %}

- More articles coming soon...
