---
title: "Apartments Guide"
weight: 620
---

This guide contains information about Apartments in GTA Online and my comments
on some popular Apartments.

## Purpose of Apartments

The core use cases of an Apartment are:

- The Apartment can be used as a spawn point, so every time when you join a new
  GTA Online session, your character will be in a dwelling instead of on
  street.

- The Garage of your Apartment allows you to own more than one Personal Vehicle
  and have a mechanic who can deliver your personal vehicle to somewhere
  nearby.

- You need a high-end Apartment to host Heists.

## Find and Buy an Apartment

The easiest way to browse and buy purchasable Apartments is to visit the
Dynasty 8 website in the game. Bring out your phone, choose "Internet", and
select "Money and Services" in the navigation bar. Scroll down through the
page, and select www.dynasty8realestate.com.

![Opening Dynasty 8 Website]({{< static-path type=img file=dynasty-8.png l10n=y >}})

The Dynasty 8 website sells both standalone Garages and Apartments.
**Apartments are represented by house icons**, and all of them offer a Garage
in addition to the house itself. Garages are represented by garage door icons.

![Apartment icon vs. Garage icon]({{< static-path img apt-vs-garage.png >}})

In the image above, the icon on the left represents an Apartment, and the other
icon on the right represents a Garage.

## Look for High-End Apartments

GTA Online offers Apartments in three price levels: low-end, medium, and
high-end. They all can be used as spawn points and offer a Garage. They are
different in the following ways:

- They have different interiors.

- The Garage capacity differs. Low-end and medium Apartments each have a 2-car
  and 6-car Garage respectively, whereas a high-end Apartment has a 10-car
  Garage.

- Only the high-end Apartments can be used to start Heists. Low-end and medium
  Apartments cannot be used for this purpose.

Thus, if you don't have enough money to spend on housing, you should only go
for high-end Apartments due to larger Garages and the ability to host Heists.

Not sure whether an Apartment you are looking for is a high-end one? Remember,
all high-end Apartments come with a 10-car Garage, so if you see a house that
only gives you a 2-car or 6-car Garage then it must not be a high-end
Apartment.

In addition, in the Dynasty 8 website, you can click on the "High-End" option
on top of the page to filter out medium and low-end properties.

![High-End properties]({{< static-path type=img file=high-end.png l10n=y >}})

## Visit an Apartment's Location

If you are not very familiar with the game's map and want to see the actual
location of an Apartment, you can set a waypoint to the location on Dynasty 8
website. In properties listing, press the "Buy" button for the Apartment you
want to visit. This will not make the purchase immediately, but instead it will
only show you a detail page for that Apartment. In that page, choose "Get
Directions", and you are ready to go.

![Get directions to an Apartment]({{< static-path type=img file=get-directions.png l10n=y >}})

## Different Suites in the Same Building

When you click on an Apartment icon in the Dynasty 8 website, you might see it
splitting into multiple icons. For example, the following is what happens after
clicking on the icon for 3 Alta St:

![Multiple options for the same
location]({{< static-path type=img file=same-bldg-diff-suites.png l10n=y >}})

You can think about them as different suites in the same Apartment building.
The locations of Apartment entrance and Garage door are the same among all the
suites. They only differ in a few factors:
- Exterior view
- Price
- Interior, only when a suite is labeled as "Updated Interior" or "Custom
  Apartment"

### Updated Interior

![Apartments with updated interior]({{< static-path type=img file=updated-interior.png l10n=y >}})

Apartment suites with updated interior feature an alternative style of look and
home furnishing, but their prices are also more expensive. You can visit
[here](https://gta.fandom.com/wiki/Apartments#High-end_.28First_style.29) for a
comparison between interior styles.

Note that all Apartments with updated interior still share the same internal
look. The difference only exists between Apartments with and without updated
interiors.

### Custom Apartment

![Custom Apartment]({{< static-path type=img file=custom-apartment.png l10n=y >}})

Custom Apartments allow you to select the style of the suite's interior from
eight preset options. They are the most expensive Apartments in GTA Online. You
can see how those styles look like in [this
video](https://youtu.be/is1zWIWlZh0).

---

Information about each Apartment location will be introduced in the next page.
