---
title: "Your First GTA$1.25M"
weight: 430
---

GTA Online has several one-time rewards that can be completed at any Rank,
which are good ways for new players to get the money they need to begin their
career. By doing all of them, you can earn GTA$1,250,000 in total, which is a
good amount of money to help you get started.

## Double-Action Revolver Challenge: $250,000

![Double-Action Revolver]({{< static-path img double-action-revolver.png >}})

After you play in a session for a few minutes, you might receive an email from
vanderlinde@eyefind.com in the game, which tells you to find a treasure using
the attached picture as a clue. This is the Treasure Hunt mission. After
completing it, you can get the Double-Action Revolver, and once you have made
50 headshots using the revolver, you will receive a $250,000 bonus. You don't
have to target other players, as killing NPCs counts for the challenge.

### Treasure Hunt Guides

- [Video guide](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B4Qx9lG7EaI) from GTA Series
  Videos

- [Webpage guide](https://gta.fandom.com/wiki/Treasure_Hunt) in the GTA Wiki on
  Fandom

### Tips

- When you are doing the Treasure Hunt, do not leave the session until you have
  unlocked the Double-Action Revolver. Otherwise, you might need to start it
  over from the beginning.

- The Treasure Hunt is easier to do with a helicopter. If you don't own one,
  you can steal one from LSIA or Sandy Shores Airfield.

- You can complete the headshots in a Mission where you will never get a Wanted
  Level, such as Pier Pressure, so your work will not be interrupted by the
  Cops.

## Stone Hatchet Challenge: $250,000

![Stone Hatchet]({{< static-path img stone-hatchet.png >}})

You might also receive another email from Maude, a Story Mode character who
gave Trevor some bounties to capture. She's offering similar things to you
through the Bounty Target missions: you get five bounties to collect, and once
you have completed all of them, she will give you a treasure's location where
you can find the Stone Hatchet. Use it to make 25 kills, and you will get
$250,000. Similar to the Double-Action Revolver challenge, taking out players
and NPCs both count towards the required number of kills.

### Bounty Target Guides

- [Video guide](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BjYIP6zkhdU) from GTA Series
  Videos

- [Webpage guide](https://gta.fandom.com/wiki/Bounty_Target) in the GTA Wiki on
  Fandom

### Tips

- There's also a small additional cash bonus for completing each bounty. If the
  target is captured and transported to Maude alive, you will get $10,000; it
  the target is killed, it still counts towards the five bounties, but you can
  only get $5,000. If you have time, you should consider capturing them alive
  for more money.

- If you choose not to kill the bounty targets, be sure not to use powerful
  weapons or make fatal shots. You may shoot their
  legs and feet with the Pistol, use dull melee weapons, or possibly use your
  fists.

- Your progress on the Bounty Target missions will be saved when you leave the
  game or switch to a new session, so you don't have to complete all the five
  bounties in a row.

- Like the Double-Action Revolver challenge, you can complete the required
  Stone Hatchet kills in a Mission where Wanted Levels are disabled.

## Navy Revolver Challenge: $250,000

![Navy Revolver]({{< static-path img navy-revolver.png >}})

Navy Revolver is the third weapon with an associated cash bonus. Unlike
Treasure Hunt and Bounty Target, the mission for obtaining the Navy Revolver is
hidden. You need to discover five different clues in the map, and kill the Los
Santos Slasher who is waiting to take you out for knowing too many secrets,
then get 50 kills with the unlocked Navy Revolver to receive the prize. Again,
you can take out both players and NPCs for the challenge.

Note that the condition of completing the Navy Revolver challenge is lax: it
just asks for 50 *kills*, unlike the Double-Action Revolver challenge, which
requires 50 *headshots*.

Upon killing the Los Santos Slasher, you receive $50,000 immediately. The
remaining $200,000 will be deposited after you get 50 kills.

### Los Santos Slasher Guides

- [Video guide](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UCciluEhAdU) from GTA Series
  Videos

- [Webpage guide](https://gta.fandom.com/wiki/Los_Santos_Slasher) in the GTA
  Wiki on Fandom

### Tips

- Like in the Double-Action Revolver challenge, finding clues is easier with a
  helicopter, and the kills could be done in a Mission with Wanted Levels
  disabled.

- Your progress of clue discoveries should be saved when you leave the session.

- The Los Santos Slasher is a tough guy, so prepare to kill him with a powerful
  weapon.

- There was a bug in GTA Online before that prevented players from receiving
  the $200,000 reward after getting 50 kills. This issue should have been
  fixed; however, if it still occurs to you, please immediately take a
  screenshot showing the problem and contact Rockstar Support.

## 2-Step Verification Bonus: $500,000

![2-Step Verification Bonus]({{< static-path img 2-step-verification.png >}})

Launched in March 2019, the Social Club 2-Step Verification Bonus gives
$500,000 to anyone who enables this extra security measure for their Social
Club account. As of now, there is no information about this bonus on Rockstar's
website, but as of June 2020, I heard that players could still claim this
bonus.

The Rockstar Support website has [an
article](https://support.rockstargames.com/articles/360000031747/Setting-Up-2-Step-Verification-with-Social-Club)
about how to enable 2-Step Verification for your Social Club account.

### Tips

- After you set up 2-Step Verification, it might take a few days for the cash
  bonus to be deposited. Should you haven't received the money for more than
  one week, please consider contacting Rockstar Support.

- If you don't like 2-Step Verification, you can disable it after receiving the
  reward.
