---
title: "Hangars Guide"
weight: 650
---

The Hangars in GTA Online allow you to store aircraft and run an Air Freight
Cargo business.

The game offers Hangars at two locations: LSIA and Fort Zancudo Military Base.
**Hangars in Fort Zancudo also give you access to the military base** (you will
get 4-star Wanted Level otherwise).

![Entering Fort Zancudo with
clearance]({{< static-path type=img file=military-base-clearance.png l10n=y >}})

## Buy a Hangar

Go to the Maze Bank Foreclosures website as you would when [buying a
Clubhouse](clubhouses-guide#buy-a-clubhouse). Then, you may click on the
"Hangars" option on the top-right corner to see only Hangars on the screen.

![Hangars on Maze Bank Foreclosures]({{< static-path type=img file=hangars.png l10n=y >}})

## Recommendation

Generally, I would not recommend grinding with Air Freight Cargo because of its
low profit and the difficulty of missions. Thus, Hangars would only be used to
stash your aircraft and get clearance to the military base. For this reason, I
suggest buying a Hangar in Fort Zancudo.

You can just go for the cheapest **Fort Zancudo Hangar 3497** if clearance to
the military base is all you need. P-996 LAZER fighter jets will spawn in the
military base, and some players like to steal one of them rather than to buy
their own jet. If you want to have a Hangar closer to the jet spawn points,
then **Fort Zancudo Hangar A2** is your best choice, though all Hangars in Fort
Zancudo allow you to enter the military base without Wanted Level.

## Storing Aircraft in Hangar

Airplanes and helicopters sold in GTA Online can be divided into two types:

1. Aircraft that must be stored in your Hangar. When you purchase such an
   aircraft, you can find a note about the Hangar requirement in its
   description.

   ![An aircraft that requires
   Hangar]({{< static-path type=img file=hangar-requirement.png l10n=y >}})

2. Pegasus vehicles, which can be summoned by calling Pegasus from your in-game
   phone.

   A list of Pegasus helicopters and planes can be found
   [here](https://gta.fandom.com/wiki/Pegasus_Lifestyle_Management#Vehicles) on
   GTA Wiki on Fandom.

   ![Calling Pegasus]({{< static-path type=img file=pegasus.png l10n=y >}})

For the first type of aircraft, you can summon them within the "Vehicles"
option of the Interaction Menu.

For the second type, you can convert a Pegasus vehicle to the first type by
requesting a delivery of your aircraft from Pegasus and flying it to your
Hangar. For more information, you may read [this
section](https://gta.fandom.com/wiki/Personal_Vehicles#Personal_Aircraft) in
the GTA Wiki.
