---
title: "The Hidden Cost"
weight: 662
toc: false
---

*The Hidden Cost* is a term I personally use to refer to the cost of business
upgrades that are crucial in making the business profitable. It is hidden
because the upgrades are not presented to you until you have purchased the
business property; and yet, it is required to keep you from losing money to
your business, so it should be included in the cost of the property.

Let us look at the Bunker for example. When you are purchasing a Bunker on Maze
Bank Foreclosures, you will be given five customizations: Bunker Style,
Personal Quarters, Shooting Range, Gun Locker, and golf caddies for
transportation inside the Bunker. None of these customizations will affect the
productivity of your Bunker.

![Customizations when purchasing a
Bunker]({{< static-path type=img file=bunker-purchase.png l10n=y >}})

After you have bought the Bunker, you can access the property and use the
laptop inside to manage your Gunrunning business. From the laptop, you can buy
another three upgrades that are not presented on the Maze Bank Foreclosures
webpage.

Here, the first two upgrades, Equipment and Staff, are the key players in
making your Bunker productive and profitable. Each of them increases the speed
of production and the price of goods manufactured in your Bunker. However, you
are not aware of them until you have purchased the Bunker.

![Bunker upgrades]({{< static-path type=img file=bunker-upgrades.png l10n=y >}})

What are the prices of those upgrades? Because I have purchased them, I cannot
make a screenshot that shows the prices, but if you trust my words, the
Equipment upgrade costs $1,155,000, and the Staff upgrade requires $598,500.
Thus, the combined hidden cost of a Bunker is $1,753,500.

Hidden costs are also seen on MC Business factories. I was able to obtain a
screenshot showing upgrade prices for a Cash Factory, and Equipment and Staff
upgrades together cost $1,153,000. For Meth Lab and Coke Lockup, the hidden
cost is $1,431,000 and $1,325,000 respectively.

![Cash Factory upgrades]({{< static-path type=img file=cash-factory-upgrades.png l10n=y >}})

Now, the fact that those upgrades are hidden from you is shown, but are they
really necessary so that you should include their costs in your budgets for
business properties, especially when the upgrades are even more expensive than
the properties themselves? Unfortunately, the answer is "yes".

To show that the upgrades are required to make your business profitable, I
resupplied my Cash Factory, which was not upgraded, and let it manufacture
product. A full bar of Supplies requires $75,000.

![Buying Supplies for Cash
Factory]({{< static-path type=img file=cash-factory-supply.png l10n=y >}})

Then, I waited until the whole bar of Supplies had been converted to product.
Without any upgrades, my stock was only worth $52,500, so I not only failed to
get anything back but lost $22,500 to the factory!

![Price of my Cash Factory's
product]({{< static-path type=img file=cash-factory-product.png l10n=y >}})

This is of course the most extreme case, but the other businesses are not
working well without the upgrades either. For the Bunker, you can only break
even. I do not have data for Meth Lab or Coke Lockup, but given that the price
of an MC Business's product increases by 40% when both of the upgrades are
purchased, I doubt if those Businesses can perform way better than break-even
without any upgrades.

Certainly, if you steal Supplies instead, your businesses become profitable.
However, this is not recommended because stealing Supplies requires too much
time. You have to do multiple steal missions to refill your factory's supply
level from empty to full. With the same amount of time spent on those missions,
you can earn more than $75,000, the price for a bar of Supplies, by selling a
Top class vehicle in Import/Export.

We will get to profits and efficiency of stealing Supplies later when it comes
to the articles discussing Gunrunning and MC Businesses. But for now, the
essential idea you should have is that **you might need to pay more than the
business property itself to ensure your business is profitable**. Please
consider *the hidden cost* as a part of the price you pay for any of the
business properties mentioned in this article.
