---
title: "Max Out Your Character's Stats"
ordinal: 420
level: 2
lang: en
---
{% include img-path.liquid %}
Like the Story Mode protagonists, your GTA Online character has various skills
that impact your character's performance in certain tasks. Maxing out the stats
of those skills will give you significant benefits in Missions and some daily
activities.

When you create a GTA Online character, you need to set the character's initial
stats. Because the difficulty of maxing out a stat varies according to the
skill, you should assign more points to the stats that are hard to max out.

This article covers how you should assign the stat points during character
creation and how to boost your character's stats in a short amount of time.

## Stats in Character Creator

Here is my suggestion on how to assign the points to your character's stats in
the Character Creator:

- Change the following stats to their minimum:
  - Stamina
  - Stealth
  - Driving
  - Lung Capacity
- Now, you have plenty of points to assign. Change the following stats to their
  maximum:
  - Shooting
  - Strength
  - Flying

After those steps, the stats for your character should look like this:

![Stats in the Character Creator]({{ img_path_l10n }}/char-creator-stats.png)

In this way, you have more points assigned to skills whose stat is hard to max
out and less points for stats that can be boosted easily.

## Boosting Your Stats

In general, every stat can be maxed out by doing the activities related to it.
However, some skills can be improved very quickly by using tricks.

### Stamina and Stealth

Stamina can be boosted by running, and stealth can be improved while you walk
in stealth mode. Thus, the fastest and most effortless way to max out them is
to keep your character running or moving in stealth mode while you are AFK.

You can find an open space and let your character run or sneak in a circle, so
your character can stay in that place without going too far away from it. In
addition, it's better to do this in a session without disturbance from other
players, preferably an Invite Only Session.

If you use a keyboard, you can put some small but heavy objects on your keys to
hold keypresses. For boosting stamina, keep pressing Shift-A or Shift-D; for
stealth, press left Ctrl once, and hold a press on either A or D. Then, you are
ready to go AFK.

If you use a controller, you can use a rubber band to fix the left joystick
into a position that can let your character move in a circle, then you are
ready to go AFK (away-from-controller, to be accurate). To boost stamina, you
should also use something to hold the sprint button on your controller to keep
your character running. To max out stealth, press the left joystick once to
enter stealth mode before applying the rubber band.

### Driving

The driving stat will usually increase as long as you play GTA Online because
driving is an activity frequently done in the game. Simply keep playing, and
your character's driving ability will improve gradually.

### Shooting and Flying

These stats will also increase in common in-game activities. Certain Missions,
such as Heists, give you opportunities to shoot enemies and use aircraft. In
addition, there is special activity for boosting each of those stats. The
shooting ranges in Ammu-Nation and your Bunker can be used to increase your
shooting skill, and completing Flight School lessons boosts your flying stat.

If you want to increase your flying stat quickly, you should consider going to
the Flight School. Each skill is maxed out at 100 points; you need 10 minutes
of active control in an aircraft to gain 1 flying point. But getting a gold
medal for a Flight School lesson directly gives you 3 to 5 points according to
the GTA Wiki on Fandom, which saves you a lot of time. As always, I suggest you
do Flight School lessons only after you already have some experience with
aircraft in the game.

Notice that using an Oppressor Mk II does not count towards flying because it
is a motorcycle, not an aircraft.

### Lung Capacity

This stat can only be boosted by diving into the water. In fact, don't feel
obligated to boost lung capacity because it only affects how long you can stay
submerged before drowning, and missions that require underwater works will
provide scuba gears or rebreathers. There is no clear evidence showing that
lung capacity influences your character's running or cycling performance.

One effective way of expanding lung capacity is to play The Cayo Perico Heist,
and use entry and escape routes that require swimming. Make sure your character
stays submerged for as long as possible. The lung capacity should gradually
increase while you are grinding The Cayo Perico Heist.

If you want to manually boost it, you can buy the scuba gear from a clothes
shop for $155,000, then dive into water and stay submerged. The scuba suit will
allow you to dive underwater indefinitely. If you don't want to spend that
money, you may still go under water and stay submerged until the oxygen bar
below the radar flashes in red, then come up, rebreathe, dive into the water
again, and repeat the process.

### Strength

Strength is the hardest skill to max out because gaining 1 skill point for it
takes you 20 punches, and there isn't any other shortcut. However, it is still
a very important skill that is worth maxing out. If the strength stat is too
low, your character will take more damage in falls, collisions, explosions and
fire, increasing your character's risk of dying due to those accidents.

I recommend increasing the strength stat to at least three bars, which is
sufficient for preventing damages from most common falls.

The best way to boost your character's strength stat is to find a place with a
lot of NPCs and take them down using your fists. You can do this with the
following steps:

1. Start a Mission where Wanted Levels are disabled, such as Pier Pressure.
   This Mission is unlocked at Rank 6.

   ![The "Pier Pressure" Mission in the Jobs
   menu]({{ img_path_l10n }}/mission-selection.png)

2. Go to the Vanilla Unicorn strip club.

   ![Location of Vanilla Unicorn]({{ img_path_l10n }}/vanilla-unicorn.png)

3. Use a vehicle to block the front door.

   ![Blocking the front door]({{ img_path_l10n }}/front-door.png)

4. Use another vehicle to block the rear door.

   ![Blocking the rear door]({{ img_path_l10n }}/rear-door.png)

5. Now, the NPCs in the strip club cannot leave the building. Enter the strip
   club and start punching them with your fists. Most NPCs will be frightened
   and will try to leave the strip club, but they will be trapped inside
   because you have blocked all doors of the building (you can climb through
   the cars, but they can't!).

If you get bored during this process, you can do some alternative activities
that can also boost your character's strength stat, like golf and tennis,
though the stat increases slower in those activities. Or, you may take a break
and continue to hit NPCs in the Mission later, because maxing out the strength
does take a non-trivial amount of time.

## Summary

In my suggestion about setting your character's initial stats, stamina,
stealth, driving and lung capacity would get the fewest points. After all,
stamina and stealth can be boosted while you are AFK, the driving ability will
be improved seamlessly as long as you play GTA Online, and lung capacity is not
very important. Maxing out shooting, strength and flying takes longer time and
requires more effort, and they are all important abilities that improve your
performance in Missions, so it is better to assign as many points as possible
to each of them.
