---
title: "Mk II Weapons"
ordinal: 523
level: 3
lang: en
---
{% include img-path.liquid %}

Mk II weapons are upgraded variants of weapons sold from Ammu-Nation that offer
better performance and more diverse accessories. This page covers Mk II
upgrades of weapons recommended in the previous pages that bring significant
improvements over their original counterpart.

## Prerequisites

To upgrade qualified weapons to their Mk II variant, you must own a Weapon
Workshop. You can get a Weapon Workshop through any of the following means:

- By installing either the Weapon Workshop bay or Weapon & Vehicle Workshop bay
  in your Mobile Operations Center.

- By purchasing the Weapon Workshop for your Avenger.

- By purchasing the Weapon Workshop for your Terrorbyte.

- By setting up The Diamond Casino Heist and completing the Unmarked Weapons
  Prep Mission. A Weapon Workshop will be available in your Arcade's basement,
  across the Heist planning boards. It will be there until you complete or
  cancel the Heist.

Note that once you own a Weapon Workshop, you can also purchase certain weapons
before reaching the Ranks required to unlock them. In other words, as long as
you have a Weapon Workshop, you can buy the Combat MG and Heavy Sniper even at
Rank 1.

## The Weapons

### Marksman Rifle Mk II

- Price for the upgrade: $149,000

![Marksman Rifle Mk II in Weapon
Wheel]({{ img_path_l10n }}/marksman-rifle-2.png)

The Marksman Rifle Mk II improves damage per shot over the original version.
This improvement should be favored by PvP players who rely on this weapon. The
Heavy Barrel attachment also increases damage of long-range shots, making it an
even better weapon for sniping.

### Combat MG Mk II

- Price for the upgrade: $119,000

![Combat MG Mk II in Weapon Wheel]({{ img_path_l10n }}/combat-mg-2.png)

The Mk II upgrade of Combat MG does not increase damage per shot very much.
However, like many other Mk II weapons, Combat MG Mk II has muzzle brake
accessories that reduce its recoil. Since the Combat MG has relatively high
recoil, the muzzle brakes make the Mk II variant more accurate and useful. In
The Doomsday Scenario finale, my Combat MG Mk II with muzzle brake was very
effective in killing Cliffford Mercenaries in the control center.

### Heavy Sniper Mk II

- Price for the upgrade: $165,375

![Heavy Sniper Mk II in Weapon Wheel]({{ img_path_l10n }}/heavy-sniper-2.png)

The Heavy Sniper's Mk II upgrade not only significantly augments the weapon's
performance but also enables unique attachments not seen on any other Mk II
weapon in GTA Online. The damage per shot is increased, the extended clip has
larger capacity of 8 rounds, and you can install a suppressor on it, which is
not available for the original Heavy Sniper. More importantly, the Thermal
Scope is the unique accessory for this weapon that is very useful for searching
enemies. It is vital for The Bogdan Problem's Avenger Setup Mission.

Some players also choose to use Explosive Rounds on this weapon, turning it
into a fabulous weapon against aircraft and flying vehicles. Rockets fired from
the Homing Launcher or RPG take time to reach target, but the mechanics of
Explosive Rounds are in no way different from ordinary bullets, meaning that
they hit your target instantly.

Note that the Thermal Scope and the Explosive Rounds require [Bunker
Research](null) to unlock.

## Downgrading Mk II Weapons

The Mk II weapon upgrades are revertible, so feel free to give them a try when
you want to test their performance. You can downgrade them for free, and after
the restoration, you can redo the Mk II upgrade with no additional charge. Any
accessories you purchased for the Mk II variant are also retained.
