---
title: "P is for Property, not Paleto Bay"
ordinal: 666
level: 3
lang: en
---
{% include img-path.liquid %}

This has been mentioned more or less in the previous parts of this collection,
but it is worth emphasizing it again since it is a mistake that so many players
will make:

Do not buy a property located near Paleto Bay only because it is cheap, when
such location has a very significant disadvantage.

More specifically, you should never consider the following two properties if
you want to make money with them, no matter what kind of offer on them is
available to you:
- Paleto Forest Bunker
- Pixel Pete's Arcade

## Properties Near Paleto Bay

On the Maze Bank Foreclosures website in the game, there have been five
properties near Paleto Bay as of this article was written: two Clubhouses, one
Facility, one Bunker, and one Arcade.

![Properties near Paleto Bay]({{ img_path_l10n }}/maze-bank-foreclosures.png)

In the [Clubhouses Guide](clubhouses-guide) I said that the location of your
Clubhouse should not matter at all in most cases, so it is definitely fair to
buy any of the two Clubhouses in Paleto Bay. Remember though, the cheapest
Clubhouse is the Great Chaparral Clubhouse on Route 68, not any of the two
Paleto Bay Clubhouses.

I have mixed opinions on the Facility. As the starting point of all Doomsday
Heist missions, the role of a Facility's location is comparable to that of your
Apartment's place in original Heists. Sitting at the corner of the map, the
Paleto Bay Facility is not the best choice in general. However, it is the
optimal Facility for The Bogdan Problem's Finale. Some players keep redoing
that mission because it is easy and has decent payout. If you are interested in
redoing it too, then the Paleto Bay Facility is a reasonable choice.

The Bunker and the Arcade can be claimed for free: the Bunker is part of the
Criminal Enterprise Starter Pack, and Twitch Prime members can get a full
rebate of the Arcade's base price. Despite this, you should get neither of
them. We will get to this in a moment.

There are also some MC Businesses near Paleto Bay. They are not being sold on
Maze Bank Foreclosures, so the screenshot above does not include them. Because
Paleto Bay is not a suitable location for business properties, and the cheapest
MC Businesses are located near Sandy Shores, there should be no reason to buy
them at Paleto Bay.

![Coke Lockups on The Open Road]({{ img_path_l10n }}/coke-lockups.png)
![Meth Labs on The Open Road]({{ img_path_l10n }}/meth-labs.png)

## Free Properties

Criminal Enterprise Starter Pack owners can claim the Paleto Forest Bunker for
free, and the Pixel Pete's Arcade is a gift to Twitch Prime members. The fact
that those two properties are free to get should never be your reason to use
them.

### Paleto Forest Bunker

I will give more details about sell missions from the Bunker later, but here is
one thing: you can either do a near sale to Blaine County or do a far sale to
the city of Los Santos for 50% additional cash bonus. The set of missions for
both types of sales is the same, so the only difference between them is the
distance you need to travel to complete the sale. Thus, for greater profits,
players should always choose to sell to Los Santos.

Paleto Bay is located at the northernmost corner of the map, so it is the
farthest destination from the city. To sell from the Paleto Forest Bunker and
collect the maximum payout, you need to drive the delivery vehicle(s) to the
city first, which can take four to five minutes, depending on the type of
vehicle you are given. Keep in mind that all Bunker sell missions are timed,
and some of them only gives you 15 precious minutes. It would be very hard to
even complete the sell mission in time when you get multiple drop-offs and
vehicles. Should you use this Bunker, you will have horrible experience with
your Gunrunning business.

People who can claim the Paleto Forest Bunker for free thanks to the Criminal
Enterprise Starter Pack might think they can use this free Bunker temporarily
just to make enough money for a better Bunker, but this is not a wise decision.
Recall [the hidden cost](the-hidden-cost) of the upgrades required to make your
Bunker profitable.  When you move to another Bunker, any upgrades you have
purchased will not be transferred, so you need to spend another $1,753,500 on
the necessary upgrades for the new Bunker, which is roughly equal to the price
of a Bunker closer to the city!

### Pixel Pete's Arcade

Arcades are mainly used for hosting The Diamond Casino Heist, which consists of
two parts: Prep Missions and the Finale.

The Preps are started from your Arcade, and most of them also require returning
something back to the Arcade. Although some of the Preps are located in Blaine
County, the majority of them take place either in Los Santos or the southern
part of Blaine County that is closer to the city. Choosing an Arcade in Los
Santos rather than Paleto Bay will save you a lot of time in completing the
Preps.

The Finale also starts at your Arcade and will of course require you to go to
The Diamond Casino and Resort in East Vinewood. If you use the Pixel Pete's
Arcade, you will have to spend about five minutes driving from Paleto Bay to
the casino in the mission. Unless you are giving a great cut of the take to
your teammates, you'd better take the wheels instead of let a teammate drive
for you, or else they will not be happy.

Twitch Prime members can get the Pixel Pete's Arcade for free. But remember,
there is no free lunch. Rockstar is only giving you the cheapest Arcade, at a
terrible location that is not preferable for the Casino Heist. When you use it,
you waste significant amount of time on travelling back and forth between
Paleto Bay and Los Santos in Prep Missions.

If you are too desperate to earn some money from the Casino Heist but cannot
afford a good Arcade, then it is fine to claim this free one and use it just
for one or two Heists, only to get enough money for a better Arcade. Please
never use it for the long term; move to a more optimal location immediately
when you can.
