---
title: "Property Utility Charges"
ordinal: 663
level: 3
lang: en
---
{% include img-path.liquid %}
GTA Online has a very interesting feature: if you have been in Freemode for one
in-game day (which equals 48 real-life minutes), the game deducts some money
from your in-game bank account for wages of your mechanic, assistant, staff in
your business properties, and property utility charges.

![Paying wages and utility charges]({{ img_path_l10n }}/deductions.png)

The price you pay for the charges depends on the following factors:

- The number and type of properties you own. The screenshot above shows that I
  paid for Nightclub, Penthouse and Arcade; if I did not own those properties,
  I would not need to pay those charges.

- **Whether your VIP, CEO or MC President status is still active** when the
  charges should be collected. For some properties, including the Bunker and MC
  Businesses, **you do not need to pay for their utility charges unless you are
  a VIP, CEO, or MC President**. When the above screenshot was taken, my
  VIP/CEO and MC were both disabled, so even though I owned a Bunker and three
  MC Businesses, I did not need to pay for them.

- **To what extent are your properties upgraded**. This applies to many types
  of property, but Rockstar is not indicating it, except for the Penthouse.

  ![In-game message about Penthouse's utility
  charge]({{ img_path_l10n }}/penthouse-utility-charges.png)

Having access to a wide array of businesses is a key to a successful GTA Online
career; when you run a lot of businesses you should also be able to worry less
about being broke. Thus, the first factor above is inevitable but also not
important.

The other factors deserve attention, and that is why they are in bold. You can
avoid their impacts by developing some good habits in your gameplay.

## Avoiding Utility Charges

It is not possible to say no to those forced payments to your properties or
staff, even if they are not doing any job at all. You have to pay your
mechanic, who delivers your car to miles away, claiming that your vehicle is
already nearby, and refuses to make another delivery because he needs a break
(stupid cool-down between vehicle deliveries, to be honest). You have to pay
your Executive Assistant, even though their only job is to sit in your Office
and issue orders to transport cargo back to the warehouse to you, like if they
are the boss and you are their assistant.

Nevertheless, you can still try your best to avoid those charges by doing the
following things:

- Turn off VIP, CEO and MC when you don't need them, so you won't pay the
  utility charges for your Bunker and MC Businesses, as mentioned in the last
  section. You can always turn them back on later.

- Only purchase the upgrades that are fundamentally useful, so the utility
  charges will not increase. We will get to this with more details later.

- Leave the current session when you think you have spent about 48 minutes in
  it. Because one in-game day takes 48 minutes, if you are about to see the
  same time of day in the lobby, it is the time to leave and avoid the property
  utility charges. For example, assume you spawned in the current session when
  it was night in-game, then you should prepare to leave at dusk.

- If you failed to track how long you have been in the current session, you can
  also leave immediately after seeing the message "you paid the mechanic for
  the day". The utility charges are not collected all at once; there is a delay
  of a few seconds between each charge. The mechanic's wage comes before every
  other charges, and fortunately it is not very high. Once you leave the
  session, the game will not collect the remaining charges.

## Utility-Charge-Free AFK Method

If you need to go idling for more than 48 minutes and also want to avoid the
property utility charges, you can AFK in a Mission. In all Missions, Heists,
races or any game mode that does not take place in the Freemode, the utility
charges are never collected no matter how long you stay.

This method requires you to have an Apartment and know where it is on the map
without its icon being shown. Here is the method:

1. Start a Contact Mission from the Pause Menu, and choose a Mission that can
   be started with only one player. The one I like to use is Blow Up, but other
   Missions work, too.

   ![Starting a Mission]({{ img_path_l10n }}/starting-a-mission.png)

2. After the Mission begins, go back to your Apartment and watch TV. Watching
   the TV in your Apartment's Garage is also fine.

   Make sure the TV controls, i.e. volume and channel selection, are shown on
   the bottom of the screen. Now, you are good to go. The game will not kick
   you for idling too long, nor will it make you pay for the property utility
   charges.

   Note that the TV is not required to be turned on. As long as the TV controls
   are shown at the screen's corner, you will not be kicked.

   ![Idling by watching TV]({{ img_path_l10n }}/watching-tv.png)

3. When you don't need to stay AFK anymore, you can either quit the Mission
   directly or complete it.
