---
title: "Criminal Enterprise Starter Pack"
weight: 700
---

The Criminal Enterprise Starter Pack is an add-on to GTA Online that gives the
owner GTA$1M and the ability to claim some properties, vehicles, weapons and
cosmetic items for free. Rockstar's advertisement claims that all the items
included in it are worth more than GTA$10M and would let the players buying it
"jumpstart their criminal empires."

![Criminal Enterprise Starter
Pack]({{< static-path type=img file=starter-pack-in-game.png l10n=y >}})

The Criminal Enterprise Starter Pack is bundled with the Premium Edition of
Grand Theft Auto V. Since January 2021, the Premium Edition has become the only
edition of the game sold on Steam, Epic Games, PlayStation Store, and Microsoft
Store, but still at the same price as the game itself without any bundled item
before. In other words, the game's price has not changed, but players who have
purchased the game after January 2021 effectively get the Criminal Enterprise
Starter Pack for free.

A full list of items included in the Criminal Enterprise Starter Pack can be
found on the [Rockstar Support
website](https://support.rockstargames.com/articles/115015759007/Contents-of-the-Criminal-Enterprise-Starter-Pack-for-GTAV).
While some of the items are useful, others are probably not.

## Useful Items

### GTA$1,000,000

Imagine someone gifts you something which is worth $100 but is not what you
like. Would you like to exchange it for a $100 gift card, so you can buy what
you want? I think everyone will answer "yes". The GTA$1M included in the
Starter Pack is just like a gift card: you can spend it freely on anything you
want to have.

In addition to the free cash in the Starter Pack, you can also [complete some
easy tasks to get another GTA$1.25M](your-first-1-25m). So, you will be able to
have $2.25M to start your GTA Online career.

Note that the bonus cash will be deposited in 7-10 days after you have created
your first GTA Online character according to [this Rockstar Newswire
article](https://www.rockstargames.com/newswire/article/o349k55255a257/GTAV-Premium-Edition-Available-Free-on-the-Epic-Games-Store-Until-May-).

### Maze Bank West Office

Of course, this is the cheapest office, but as mentioned in the [Offices
Guide](offices-guide), this is not a bad choice if you don't have enough money
for a more expensive Office. You can buy the Del Perro Heights Apartment if
having an Office close to your Apartment matters to you.

### Great Chaparral Clubhouse

In the [Clubhouses Guide](clubhouses-guide), I said the location of your
Clubhouse should not matter because you are not likely to make frequent visits
to it. As long as you own a Clubhouse, you are good to start MC-related
activities. And the free Clubhouse in the Starter Pack will save you $200,000.

### Senora Desert Cash Factory

This is the cheapest Cash Factory, located at [the greatest place for MC
Businesses](null) in my opinion. The Cash Factory is not the most profitable
passive business, but it is not a bad one. If you purchase a Nightclub later,
the Cash Factory will also grant you an additional source of income in the
Nightclub Warehouse.

### Marksman Rifle

[Marksman Rifle](essential-weapons#marksman-rifle) is one of the essential
weapons in my weapon recommendations. It is useful in missions that require you
to do stealth kills. Some PvP players also favor this weapon.

## Optional Items

The items listed here can be useful in some cases, but you still can live your
life without them.

### Frogger Helicopter

When you don't have access to flying vehicles like Oppressor Mk II, a
helicopter is the best tool for moving around the map quickly. Having your own
helicopter is great; however, LSIA and Sandy Shores Airfield often spawn
helicopters, so even if you don't have a chopper, you can steal one from those
places.

What is more, the Frogger does not have any weapons, so you can use it merely
for transportation, not combats against NPCs. For the latter purpose, the
Buzzard Attack Chopper is a better choice.

### 1337 Exceptionalists Way Garage

This is only a 10-car Garage which can only be used to store your vehicles. In
order to do Heists, you might want to buy a high-end Apartment, which also
includes a 10-car Garage. Unless you really have more than 10 vehicles to
stash, you can just use the Garage of your Apartment rather than a dedicated
one.

### 1561 San Vitus St Apartment

Like all Apartments, this free Apartment included in the Starter Pack can be
used as a spawn point. But it is a low-end Apartment with a tiny 2-car Garage,
which cannot be used for Heists. In order to unlock Heists, please get a
high-end Apartment. Nevertheless, you can still claim this one since you can
own multiple Apartments.

## Cosmetic Items

Once you have the Starter Pack, there are many outfits, clothes and tattoos you
can get for free.

Besides these player customization items, the Starter Pack also includes a few
coupes, sports cars and motorcycles, which are not the best ones with the
greatest performance. I am classifying them as cosmetic items as well because
they do not make any significant difference to your GTA Online gaming
experience, but some players, especially car collectors, might want to have
them.

I want to make a special remark on the **Dune FAV**, the only weaponized
vehicle in the Starter Pack. It is neither bulletproof nor very resistant to
explosions, and its weapon can be controlled by the passenger only, not the
driver. Thus, this vehicle is weak in combats. You can play around with the
Dune FAV, but please don't expect to knock down lots of enemies with it.

## Items to Avoid

If the cosmetic items are not very useful but still OK to have, then the
following things in the Starter Pack **should not be claimed at all**.

### Paleto Forest Bunker

This is the infamous Bunker I have [criticized in the article about Paleto Bay
properties](paleto-bay-properties#paleto-forest-bunker). **Do not get it; the
Gunrunning business run with this Bunker is very unlikely to be profitable**.

![Avoid the free Bunker in the Starter Pack under all possible
conditions]({{< static-path type=img file=free-bunker.png l10n=y >}})

### Compact Grenade Launcher

I have given reasons not to buy this weapon
[before](not-recommended-weapons#compact-grenade-launcher). To summarize, this
weapon is less powerful than the regular Grenade Launcher, and using it on
motorcycles is dangerous. As mentioned multiple times before, a smaller weapon
collection is more preferable in GTA Online. So, if you are not sure whether
you should have this weapon, then **don't claim it at all**.

### Compact Rifle

This weapon has not been mentioned in this collection so far. It is an assault
rifle that can be used on motorcycles, just like the Compact Grenade Launcher
be the heavy weapon available on motorcycles. But, why not just use an AP
Pistol instead? The AP Pistol can be used on not only motorcycles but also
cars, and its performance is comparable to assault rifles, so it is the weapon
you can use everywhere. To keep your weapon inventory compact, **you should not
go for the Compact Rifle**, but use AP Pistol and Special Carbine instead.
